# Dooyeweerd: There is No Secular Justification for the State

Ben Van de Wall, National Research University Higher School of Economics


Herman Dooyeweerd was a Dutch Neo-Calvinist philosopher. Building on the legacy of Calvinists from the 19th century, particularly the ideas of theologian, minister and politician Abraham Kuyper, Dooyeweerd developed a systematic philosophical foundation for Neo-Calvinist thought that was politically advanced by the Anti-Revolutionary Party. His ‘reformational philosophy’ covered the full spectrum of philosophy – from metaphysics, to epistemology, and so on – but it culminated in a justification of the state that revolved around the notion of sphere sovereignty. Dooyeweerd argues that any understanding of the state that is derived from constructions of human thought (both rationalist or irrationalist) ends up in philosophical contradictions. Only by acknowledging that the state is part of a divinely created world, can we do justice to it. Following from the basic idea that only God is fully sovereign, Dooyeweerd rejects the appropriation of sovereignty by human beings. Instead, the only kind of political sovereignty that can rightfully exist is a limited type of ‘sphere sovereignty.’ In other words, God has set the limits of the different domains of human and natural life, and political sovereignty can only extend to that which is ‘appropriate to its own sphere’. The Calvinist notion of creation simultaneously justifies political authority and provides normative orientation for determining its limits with respect to other ‘institutional communities’, such as the church or the family. While sphere sovereignty is a fundamental ontological principle in Dooyeweerd’s philosophy, it was a key concept in the Neo-Calvinist political struggle for the independence of the church communities and their protection from an all too powerful state. As such, this explicitly religious justification of the state did not result in the propagation of a state church, but in a pluralist model in which different denominations are treated equally.


