# Jürgen Habermas on Justifying the State through Communicative Rationality

Oris Kondwani Chimphambano
Department of Philosophy, University of Malawi, Zomba, Malawi
ochimphambano@unima.ac.mw

This study seeks to respond to "Can the state be justified?" through Jürgen Habermas's theorisation of communicative
action and discourse ethics. The study departs from traditional liberal or authoritarian notions that often ground the
legitimacy of the state in consent, utility and sovereign power. Central to my argument is that the justification of the
state must instead emerge from continuous processes of rational, inclusive, and non-coercive communication. Drawing on
Habermas's theorisation of deliberative democracy, I propose that the state is only normatively justified insofar as it
institutionalises the conditions under which citizens are able to participate as equals in public discourse or
deliberation concerning the laws and norms that govern them. Rather than viewing the state as a neutral arbiter or
necessary enforcer, this approach reconceives the state as a medium through which communicative rationality can be
translated into legitimate authority. In exposing the gap between actual political institutions and the ideals of
discourse ethics, the chapter highlights how contemporary states in modernity often rely on technocratic or strategic
forms of reason that undermine their relevance and legitimacy. Ultimately, the paper affirms that the justification of
the state should not be seen as a settled fact. Instead, it must be seen as a continuous democratic project grounded in
communicative reason. This study is qualitative, and it will be organised into five sections. Section 1 is the
introduction and it situates the justification of the state within contemporary but critical political philosophy.
Section 2 encompasses Jürgen Habermas's concepts of communicative action and discourse ethics as the theoretical
framework. Section 3 presents a critique of traditional justifications of the State and highlights their conceptual
limitations. Section 4 is an analysis and proposes the argument that the state can only be justified when it promotes
communicative reason. Section 5 reflects on the gap between existing state practices and the ideals of discourse ethics
and rational communication. The chapter also proposes that state legitimacy must remain an ongoing democratic process
rather than a settled fact before drawing the discussion to a close. 


